---
layout: post
title: "Brief History of Mars Exploration"
description: "Curiosity leads to each and every ivention, innovation and exploration"
owner: "Mayank Pandit"
about: "Mayank is Team Lead at ARES Robotics. His insterest covers CAD and CAM designs and Suspesnion system. He is also learning ROS and openCV for obstacle detection."
linkdin: "https://www.linkedin.com/in/mayank-pandit-516494a8/"
facebook: "facebook link"
instagram: "instgram link"
ownimage: "manan_profile.jpeg"
category: articles
tags: [rovers, USSR, NASA, USA]
date: 2020-08-16
image:
  feature: "https://robohub.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Screenshot-from-2014-03-14-07_34_30.png"
---

Ever since the humans took first breadth on the Blue Planet Earth, they are constantly evolving, always finding the way to evolve, invent, innovate. According to our historians humans first significant discovery was Fire, then wheel, then the uncountable things which made tougher to keep track of this never ending chain. What we find common in the inventions till date is curiosity to build something, curiosity to try and test new things. Many of these proved to be boon for human civilization and as well as for other living beings. During the second world war, many countries from allies and axis were enjoying and dominating due to their missile programs. Till the end of world war, these missile programs provided the solution to escape earth’s gravity, powerful rockets were invented that were capable of lifting the payload against the earth’s gravity and could face the high temperature of the boosters.These missile programs in late 1950’s laid the foundation for the space programs by the major countries. Both the USSR and USA two locked giants announced their space program at the same time in 1957. USSR won the initial race by launching their first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, into space. Four years later on April 12, 1961, Russian Lt. Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth in Vostok 1. His flight lasted 108 minutes, and Gagarin reached an altitude of 327 kilometers (about 202 miles) above sea level. Both these instances proved and consolidated the dominance of USSR in space exploration as they were able to leave behind the USA in this race but initially. Due to this space race, space exploration infrastructure got the much needed boost and the USA was able to land the first human on the moon July 20, 1969. After this great leap whole focus was shifted to interplanetary missions although these types of missions were taking place from early 1960’s but during that time, main focus was to reach the moon first, so these interplanetary missions couldn’t get that much light and funds during this time. In the meantime the satellite and communication sector bloomed for the use of military and civilian purposes. Orbiting communications and navigating satellites were in everyday use. USSR were very much eager to take revenge to compensate for their losses and reputations. To do so, they started launching their orbiter iteration named MARS. This was equipped with sensors to study and gather geological and atmospheric data to earth, after several attempts they were successful in putting the orbiter in the orbit of Mars. At the other end of the world, USA space agency were also working with their orbiter MARINER. Both the countries were in fierce competition to land on Mars and Russian agency were able to do the same before the USA in late 1980’s, but this was the last major achievement of USSR in their space program because in 1991 USSR dismantled and the space program was paused. Now, NASA was solely in power. The breakthrough came in 1996, when NASA sent a 25 pound rover on Mars. The Pathfinder lander and Sojourner rover arrived at Mars in July 1997. The lander was the first to use a set of airbags to cushion the landing, and Sojourner was the first rover to trundle around on Mars. Pathfinder was expected to last a month and Sojourner a week, but both remained in operation until September 1997, when contact was lost with Pathfinder. With this advancement this journey began. Subsequent advanced rovers were based on observations of the previous iterations were sent to the Red Planet. In 2004, twin rover Opportunity and Spirit were sent, then in 2011 Curiosity was sent which was capable of doing metrological tests also. In 2014, Indian Space research organisation sent the Mangalyaan (Mars Orbiter Mission) and was successfully placed in the Mars Orbit in the first attempt. On May 5th 2018, Mars InSight lander was sent which was capable of studying in depth the “inner space” - its crust, mantle and core. Latest rover sent to Mars is PERSEVERANCE!
*At the end i would like to say that space exploration is in very niche stages, there's a lot to come in future with more concenration deep space exploration.*
*Viva la Vida*


